.TH TLDC 1 "December 2021" "libtld 2.x" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
tldc \- Compile TLDs to a binary .tld file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tldc
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fB--source\fR|\fB-s\fR \fISOURCE\fR] [\fIOUTPUT-FILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Compile a set of TLD descriptions found in .ini files in the SOURCE
directory tree to OUTPUT\-FILE which is a binary file format ready
to be used by the tld(3) function. The strings are \fIcompressed\fR
in one super string, and the TLD descriptions are sorted for very
quick binary searches.
.SS "Options:"
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
print this help, then exit
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print version number, then exit
.TP
\fB\-\-c-file\fR
define the filename of a C file where to output the binary data which can
then be statically compiled in the libtld library; this is used as the
fallback data by the
.BR tld (3)
command
.TP
\fB\-\-output-json\fR
output the data in a JSON file, the filename is the output filename with
the .tld replaced with .json
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-source\fR \fISOURCE\fR
define the top directory of the directory tree of .ini files to compile
.TP
\fB\-\-verify\fR
run the verification step which makes sure that the saved file can be
reloaded and compared against the existing input data; this step uses the
JSON output data to ensure equality
.PP
The \fB\-\-source\fR command line option changes the source directory tree.
By default this is \fB`/usr/share/libtld/tlds'\fR. That directory includes a
softlink named \fB`extensions'\fR pointing to \fB`/var/lib/libtld/tlds'\fR.
The latter directory is where you are expected to add your own .ini files
if you want to extend the list.
.PP
The \fB\-\-output\-json\fR command line option tells the compile to also
generate a .json file. (\fBTODO:\fR create a version of the
.BR tld (3)
command in JavaScript.)
.PP
The \fB\-\-verify\fR command line option is used at compile time to make
sure that the writing of the .tld file and the later loading of that data
works as expected. You do not need to use that option if you are just
updating your list of TLDs. The input files are verified either way and if
there is an error in one of the .ini file, you will get an error message
with a filename and line number with or without that option.
.PP
The \fB\-\-c\-file\fR command line option is also used at compile time.
Actually, the project creates a temporary tool which sole purpose (nearly)
is to generate the \fBtld_data.c\fR file so the library can include a
statically defined fallback internally. This is a representation of the
binary file in a C array.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Alexis Wilke <alexis@m2osw.com>.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <https://github.com/m2osw/libtld/issues>.
.br
libtld home page: <https://snapwebsites.org/project/libtld>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2011-2023  Made to Order Software Corp.  All Rights Reserved
.br
License: MIT
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
.br
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR validate-tld (1),
.BR tld (3),
.BR tld.ini (5).
